Add spec changes for image extensions (#298)
buildpacks/spec: image-extension.md

- Image extensions' `/bin/build` MUST NOT write to the app directory.
- `$CNB_LAYERS_DIR` MUST be the absolute path of an `<output>` directory and MUST NOT be the path of the buildpack layers directory.
- If an image extension is missing `/bin/build`, the image extension root MUST be treated as a pre-populated `<output>` directory.

## Data Format

### Files

### extension.toml (TOML)

This section describes the 'Extension descriptor'.

```toml
api = "<buildpack API version>"

[extension]
id = "<extension ID>"
name = "<extension name>"
version = "<extension version>"
homepage = "<extension homepage>"
description = "<extension description>"
keywords = [ "<string>" ]
sbom-formats = [ "<string>" ]

[[extension.licenses]]
type = "<string>"
uri = "<uri>"
```

Image extension authors MUST choose a globally unique ID, for example: "io.buildpacks.apt".

The image extension `id`, `version`, `api`, `licenses`, and `sbom-formats` entries MUST follow the requirements defined in the [Buildpack Interface Specification](buildpack.md).

> ### launch.toml (TOML) for extensions; for buildpacks see the [Buildpack Interface Specification](buildpack.md)

Reviewer: I don't understand these files. Are they provided with the image extension? What does "for extensions" and "for buildpacks" mean?

Author: It should be "output by" ...I'll change the wording.

```toml
[[args]]
name = "<build arg name>"
value = "<build arg value>"

[[labels]]
key = "<label key>"
value = "<label valu>"
```

The image extension MAY specify any number of args or labels.

For each arg, the image extension:

> - MUST specify a `name` to be the name of a build argument that will be provided to any output Dockerfile or run.Dockerfile when extending the run base image.

Author: ```suggestion
- MUST specify a `name` to be the name of a build argument that will be provided to all output Dockerfiles or run.Dockerfiles when extending the run base image.
```

- MUST specify a `value` to be the value of the build argument when it is provided.

The image extension `labels` entries MUST follow the requirements defined in the [Buildpack Interface Specification](buildpack.md).

### build.toml (TOML) for buildpacks; for image extensions see the [Image Extension Specification](image-extension.md)

```toml
[[args]]
name = "<build arg name>"
value = "<build arg value>"

[[unmet]]
name = "<dependency name>"
```

For each arg, the image extension:

> - MUST specify a `name` to be the name of a build argument that will be provided to any output Dockerfile or build.Dockerfile when extending the build base image.

Author: ```suggestion
- MUST specify a `name` to be the name of a build argument that will be provided to all output Dockerfiles or build.Dockerfiles when extending the build base image.
```

Correspondingly, each `/bin/build` executable:

- MAY read from the `<app>` directory.
- MUST NOT write to the `<app>` directory.
- MAY read the build environment as described in the [Environment](#environment) section.
- MAY read the Buildpack Plan.
- MAY log output from the build process to `stdout`.
- MAY emit error, warning, or debug messages to `stderr`.
- MAY write any combination of Dockerfile, build.Dockerfile, and run.Dockerfile to the `<output>` directory. These files MUST adhere to the requirements listed below.
- MAY write key-value pairs to `<output>/launch.toml` that are provided as build args to Dockerfile or run.Dockerfile when extending the run image.
- MAY write key-value pairs to `<output>/build.toml` that are provided as build args to Dockerfile or build.Dockerfile when extending the build image.
- SHOULD write SBOM (Software-Bill-of-Materials) files as described in the [Software-Bill-of-Materials](#software-bill-of-materials) section describing any contributions to the app image or build environment.

#### Dockerfile Requirements

run.Dockerfiles:

- MAY contain multiple `FROM` instructions

> - MAY contain any instruction except for `CMD` and `ENTRYPOINT`

Author: We override the entrypoint anyway. We don't currently require that `Cmd` is null in the run image config, but it would be a bit weird if it weren't.

build.Dockerfiles and Dockerfiles:

- MUST begin with:
```bash
ARG base_image
FROM ${base_image}
```
- MUST NOT contain any other `FROM` instructions

> - MAY contain `ADD`, `ARG`, `COPY`, `ENV`, `LABEL`, `RUN`, `SHELL`, `USER`, and `WORKDIR` instructions

Author: I don't really know if this is the right list. I took my best guess.

  - [Data Format](#data-format)
    - [Files](#files)
    - [extension.toml (TOML)](#extensiontoml-toml)
    - [launch.toml (TOML)](#launchtoml-toml)
    - [build.toml (TOML)](#buildtoml-toml)

## Image Extension API Version

This document accompanies Buildpack API version `0.8`.

## Image Extension Interface

Unless otherwise noted, image extensions are expected to conform to the [Buildpack Interface Specification](buildpack.md).

### Detection

Executable: `/bin/detect`, Working Dir: `<app[AR]>`

Image extensions participate in the buildpack [detection](buildpack.md#detection) process, with the same interface for `/bin/detect`. However:
- Detection is optional for image extensions, and they are assumed to pass detection when `/bin/detect` is not present.
- Image extensions MUST only output `provides` entries to the build plan. They MUST NOT output `requires`.

### Build-Ext

Executable: `/bin/build`, Working Dir: `<app[AR]>`

Image extensions participate in a build-ext process that is similar to the buildpack [build](buildpack.md#build) process, with the same interface for `/bin/build`. However:
- Image extensions' `/bin/build` MUST NOT write to the app directory.

> - `$CNB_LAYERS_DIR` MUST be the absolute path of an `<output>` directory and MUST NOT be the path of the buildpack layers directory.

Author: :/ maybe we should change this env var (for both buildpacks and extensions) to `CNB_OUTPUT_DIR`?

> - `$CNB_LAYERS_DIR` MUST be the absolute path of an `<output>` directory and MUST NOT be the path of the buildpack layers directory.

Author: Or just extensions...

> - `$CNB_LAYERS_DIR` MUST be the absolute path of an `<output>` directory and MUST NOT be the path of the buildpack layers directory.

Author: Updated in bf837f6

## Phase: Build-Ext

### Purpose

The purpose of the build-ext phase is to generate Dockerfiles that can be used to extend the build and/or run base images. The Build-Ext phase MUST NOT be run for Windows builds.

### Process

**GIVEN:**
- The final ordered group of image extensions determined during the detection phase,
- A directory containing application source code,
- The Buildpack Plan,
- An `<output>` directory used to store generated artifacts,
- A shell, if needed,

For each image extension in the group in order, the lifecycle MUST execute `/bin/build`.

1. **If** the exit status of `/bin/build` is non-zero, \
   **Then** the lifecycle MUST fail the build.

2. **If** the exit status of `/bin/build` is zero,
    1. **If** there are additional image extensions in the group, \
       **Then** the lifecycle MUST proceed to the next image extension's `/bin/build`.

    2. **If** there are no additional image extensions in the group, \
       **Then** the lifecycle MUST proceed to the extend phase.

For each `/bin/build` executable in each image extension, the lifecycle:

> - MUST provide path arguments to `/bin/build` as described in the [Image Extension Interface](image-extension.md) section.

Author: I like `generate`

> - MUST provide path arguments to `/bin/build` as described in the [Image Extension Interface](image-extension.md) section.

Author: Updated in bf837f6

- MUST configure the build environment as described in the [Environment](#environment) section.
- MUST provide all `<plan>` entries that were required by any image extension or buildpack in the group during the detection phase with names matching the names that the image extension provided.

Correspondingly, each `/bin/build` executable:

- MAY read from the `<app>` directory.

> - MUST NOT write to the `<app>` directory.

Reviewer 2: How/where will we be enforcing this?

Author: The same way we enforce buildpacks not writing to other buildpacks' layers directory (wishful thinking) :)

This is something that we could add in theory, but it would to subject to the same concerns outlined in https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/155

- MAY read the build environment as described in the [Environment](#environment) section.
- MAY read the Buildpack Plan.
- MAY log output from the build process to `stdout`.
- MAY emit error, warning, or debug messages to `stderr`.
- MAY write any combination of Dockerfile, build.Dockerfile, and run.Dockerfile to the `<output>` directory. These files MUST adhere to the requirements listed below.
- MAY write key-value pairs to `<output>/launch.toml` that are provided as build args to Dockerfile or run.Dockerfile when extending the run image.
- MAY write key-value pairs to `<output>/build.toml` that are provided as build args to Dockerfile or build.Dockerfile when extending the build image.

> - SHOULD write SBOM (Software-Bill-of-Materials) files as described in the [Software-Bill-of-Materials](#software-bill-of-materials) section describing any contributions to the app image or build environment.

Reviewer 2: How can it write a SBOM here without access to the actual files that will be generated during extension?

Author: I think we should take this out. We don't need each image extension writing SBOM files when we have `genpkgs`.

Author: Removed in bf837f6

#### Dockerfile Requirements

run.Dockerfiles:

- MAY contain multiple `FROM` instructions
- MAY contain any instruction except for `CMD` and `ENTRYPOINT`

build.Dockerfiles and Dockerfiles:

- MUST begin with:
```bash
ARG base_image
FROM ${base_image}
```

> - MUST NOT contain any other `FROM` instructions

Author: Linking to discussion here: https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/173/files#r794629405

The concern is that we could end up switching to a base image that doesn't have buildpacks on it.

> - MUST NOT contain any other `FROM` instructions

Reviewer 3: I would rather have this as a 'SHOULD' than a MUST.. it's doable, IF you really know what you are doing, and closing that door with a MUST might end up closing an escape hatch that someone might need =) 

I've tried swapping build images in the PoC (and copying the /cnb folder from the previous image via multistage) and it is doable, but I hit odd issues executing the build step after the extension step, that I suspect were related to that switch.. I suspect with enough care, with certain constraints it could be done.. eg, if the image switched to was built as a stack image that includes the buildpacks content, etc, etc, etc.

- A list of build args for each Dockerfile specified during the build-ext phase,

For each Dockerfile in the group in order, the lifecycle MUST apply the Dockerfile to the base image as follows:

- The lifecycle MUST provide each Dockerfile with:
- A `base_image` build arg
    - For the first Dockerfile, the value MUST be the original base image.
    - When there are multiple Dockerfiles, the value MUST be the intermediate image generated from the application of the previous Dockerfile.
- A `build_id` build arg
    - The value MUST be a UUID
- `user_id` and `group_id` build args
    - For the first Dockerfile, the values MUST be the original `uid` and `gid` from the `User` field of the config for the original base image.
    - When there are multiple Dockerfiles, the values MUST be the `uid` and `gid` from the `User` field of the config for the intermediate image generated from the application of the previous Dockerfile.

#### Ability to rebase

When extending the run image, a Dockerfile MAY indicate that it preserves the ability to rebase by including the following instruction:

```bash
LABEL io.buildpacks.rebasable=true
```

> For the final image to be rebasable, the provided run image and all applied Dockerfiles MUST indicate rebasability.

Reviewer 2: What will happen in case this label is set to true? What are the cases when an extension ran and the output image is still rebaseable? 

One other thing I am unsure about is how we will uniquely identify a "family" of base images that can be rebased with one another. 

I know we thought about replacing stack id with some other identifier that indicates the "family" of base images - how does that fit in here?

Reviewer 2: The whole rebase picture with extensions is still unclear to me. It would be nice if we can have some actual examples of cases where/how this can work with platforms like pack or kpack.

Reviewer 3: I'm thinking / hoping that an extension can still set rebaseable=true, where it modifies the build image (say to install runtimes, tools to build etc) .. but limits the runtime changes to just using 'FROM' to switch to a different run image.. I think this would still qualify to be rebaseable, as future run images can still be swapped in.. provided they still contain the required dependencies that were met by the substituted run image. In theory this allows for the existence of a generic builder image that tailors itself to install runtimes/tools etc, working in conjunction with a set of run images to cover the most common scenarios.. and maybe, also in conjunction with a generic (non rebaseable) run image to cover the edge cases where the common image was insufficient.

Author: I wonder, in the case where a Dockerfile is applied, but all it does is switch the base image (using a `FROM` instruction):
* Should we publish a new "extended" run image (the `<target-image>` argument provided to the `extender`)
  * Opinion: no, that seems confusing
* Should we run `genpkgs`?
  * Opinion: no, but we should make an effort to locate an sbom for the new run image (see https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/211)

## Data Format

### Files

### extension.toml (TOML)

This section describes the 'Extension descriptor'.

```toml
api = "<buildpack API version>"

[extension]
id = "<extension ID>"
name = "<extension name>"
version = "<extension version>"
homepage = "<extension homepage>"
description = "<extension description>"
keywords = [ "<string>" ]
sbom-formats = [ "<string>" ]

[[extension.licenses]]
type = "<string>"
uri = "<uri>"
```

Image extension authors MUST choose a globally unique ID, for example: "io.buildpacks.apt".

The image extension `id`, `version`, `api`, `licenses`, and `sbom-formats` entries MUST follow the requirements defined in the [Buildpack Interface Specification](buildpack.md).

### launch.toml (TOML)

This section describes the `launch.toml` output by image extensions; for buildpacks see the [Buildpack Interface Specification](buildpack.md).

```toml
[[args]]
name = "<build arg name>"
value = "<build arg value>"

[[labels]]
key = "<label key>"

> value = "<label valu>"

Reviewer 2: What is the benefit of exposing another way of setting labels for extensions when they can directly use the dockerfile LABEL instruction?

Author: I can't think of any... maybe we should take it out?
